=head1 NAME

Tangram::Array - map a Perl array

=head1 SYNOPSIS

	use Tangram;

	# or
	use Tangram::Core;
	use Tangram::Array;

	$schema = Tangram::Schema->new(

		classes => { Company => { fields => {

		array =>
		{
			# long form
			employee =>
			{
				class => 'Person',
				table => 'Company_employees',
				coll => 'company',
				item => 'employee',
				slot => 'slot'
			},

			# short form
			assets => 'Asset',
		}

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Maps a reference to a Perl array.

The array may contain only objects of persistent classes. These classes
must have a common persistent base class.

Tangram uses a link table to save the state of the collection. The
table has three columns, which contain

=over 4

=item * the id of the container objects

=item * the id of the elements

=item * the position of the element in the array

=back

The field names are passed in a hash that associates a field name with
a field descriptor. The field descriptor may be either a hash or a
string. The hash uses the following fields:

=over 4

=item * class

=item * table

=item * coll

=item * item

=item * slot

=back

Mandatory field C<class> specifies the class of the elements.

Optional field C<table> sets the name of the link table. This
defaults to 'C_F', where C is the class of the containing object and F
is the field name.

Optional field C<coll> sets the name the column containing the ids of
the containing objects. This defaults to 'coll'.

Optional field C<item> sets the name the column containing the ids of
the elements. This defaults to 'item'.

Optional field C<slot> sets the name the column containing the
position of the elements. This defaults to 'slot'.

If the descriptor is a string, it is interpreted as the name of the
element's class. This is equivalent to specifying only the C<class>
field in the hash variant.
