=head1 NAME

Tangram::IntrArray - map Perl arrays using a foreign key

=head1 SYNOPSIS

	use Tangram;

	# or
	use Tangram::Core;
	use Tangram::IntrArray;

	$schema = Tangram::Schema->new(

		classes => { Agenda => { fields => {

		iarray =>
		{
			# long form
			entries =>
			{
				class => 'Entry',
				coll => 'agenda',
			},

			# or (short form)
			entries => 'Entry',
		}

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This class maps references to a Perl array in an intrusive
fashion. The persistent fields are grouped in a hash under the
C<iarray> key in the field hash.

The array may contain only objects of persistent classes. These classes
must have a common persistent base class.

Tangram uses two columns on the element's table to store:

=over 4

=item * the id of the object containing the collection

=item * the position of the element in the collection

=back

CAUTION: the same object may not be an element of the same collection,
in two different objects. This mapping may be used only for
one-to-many relationships.

The field names are passed in a hash that associates a field name with
a field descriptor. The field descriptor may be either a hash or a
string. The hash uses the following fields:

=over 4

=item * class

=item * coll

=item * slot

=item * back

=back

Mandatory field C<class> specifies the class of the elements.

Optional field C<coll> sets the name the column containing the id of
the containing object. This defaults to 'C_m', where 'C' is the class
of the containing object, and 'm' is the field name.

Optional field C<slot> sets the name the column containing the id of
the containing object. This defaults to 'C_m_slot', where 'C' is the
class of the containing object, and 'm' is the field name.

Optional field C<back> sets the name of a field that is inserted in
the elements. That field acts as a demand-loaded, read-only reference
to the object containing the collection.

If the descriptor is a string, it is interpreted as the name of the
element's class. This is equivalent to specifying only the C<class>
field in the hash variant.



