# -*- perl -*-

=head1 NAME

Tangram::Storage - persistent object database

=head1 SYNOPSIS

   use Tangram;
   
   $storage = Tangram::Storage->connect( $schema,
      $data_source, $username, $password );

   $oid = $storage->insert( $obj );
   @oids = $storage->insert( @objs );

   $storage->update( $obj );
   $storage->update( @objs );

   $obj = $storage->load( $oid );
   @objs = $storage->load( @oids );

   @objs = $storage->select( $class );
   @objs = $storage->select( $remote, $filter );

   $cursor = $storage->cursor( $remote, $filter );

   if ($storage->oid_isa($oid, "ClassName")) {
       # oid $oid is a ClassName
   }

   $storage->disconnect();

=head1 DESCRIPTION

A Tangram::Storage object is a connection to a database configured for
use with Tangram.

=head1 MEMORY MANAGEMENT

Starting with version 1.18, Tangram attempts to use the support for
weak reference that was introduced in Perl 5.6. Whether that support
is found or not has a major impact on how Storage influences object
lifetime.

If weakref support I<is> available, Storage uses weak references to
keep track of objects that have already been loaded. This does I<not>
prevent the objects from being reclaimed by Perl. IOW, the I<client>
code decides how long an object remains in memory.

If weakref support I<is not> available, Storage uses normal, 'strong'
references. Storage will pin in memory all the objects that have been
loaded I<and> inserted through it, until you call L<"disconnect"> or
L<"unload">.

In either case, Tangram will I<not> break circular structures for you.

=head1 INTERNAL CONNECTION

Except in the implementation of cursor(), Tangram uses a single DBI
connection in its operations.  That connection is called the
'internal' connection. Since, in general, database managers do not
allow multiple result sets on the same connection, the internal
connection can be used only to carray a single task at a time.

L<Tangram::Cursor>s returned by cursor() do not suffer from this
limitation because they use a separate DBI connection.

=head1 CLASS METHODS

=head2 connect

   $storage = connect( $schema,
      $data_source, $username, $auth, \%options )

Connects to a storage and return a handle object. Dies in case of failure.

$schema is an L<Tangram::Schema> object consistent with the database.

$data_source, $username and $auth are passed directly to
DBI::connect().

\%options is a reference to a hash that may contain the following
fields:

=over 4

=item * dbh

Pass in an already connected DBI handle

=item * no_tx

Specify explicitly whether or not transactions are possible.  If they
are not, then Tangram can guarantee consistency by serialising
transaction updates - which guarantees poor performance and means that
you can never use C<$storage-E<gt>rollback>.

If you are using MySQL, you should consider using the InnoDB table
type to avoid this problem.  Also note that you will explicitly have
to set this option if you have InnoDB tables configured, as there is
no real way of telling if transactions are available for any given
query without either trying to do a rollback, or querying the table
types for every table.  Which I don't think it's Tangram's duty to do!

=item * no_subselects

Functions that need to perform sub-selects will die immediately or
attempt to emulate the functionality required, rather than relying on
the RDBMS to return a failure.

This is currently ignored, but that's not functionally relevant :-).
It can be read as C<$storage-E<gt>{no_subselects}> however, as the
correct value is automatically detected on connection.

=back

All fields are optional.

C<dbh> can be used to connect a Storage via an existing DBI
handle. $data_source, $username and $auth are still needed because
Tangram may need to open extra connections (see below).

=head1 INSTANCE METHODS

=head2 insert

   $storage->insert( @objs );

Inserts objects in storage. Returns the ID(s) assigned to the
object(s).  This method is valid in both L<scalar and list contexts>.

The inserted objects must be of a class described in the schema
associated to the storage.

Attempting to insert an object that is already persistent in the
storage is an error.

Tangram will automatically insert any object that is refered by $obj
if it is not already present in storage. In the following example:

   my $homer = NaturalPerson->new(
      firstName => 'Homer', name => 'Simpson',
      children => Set::Object->new(
         NaturalPerson->new(
            firstName => 'Bart', name => 'Simpson' ),
         NaturalPerson->new(
            firstName => 'Lisa', name => 'Simpson' ),
         NaturalPerson->new(
            firstName => 'Maggie', name => 'Simpson'
      ) ) );

   $storage->insert( $homer );

...Tangram automatically inserts the kids along with Homer.

=head2 update

   $storage->update( @objs );

Save objects to storage.  This method is valid in both L<scalar and
list contexts>.

The objects must be of a class described in the schema associated to
the storage.

Attempting to update an object that is not already present in the
storage is an error.

Tangram will automatically insert any object that is refered by an
inserted object if it is not already present in storage. It will not
automatically update the refered objects that are already stored. In
the following example:

   my $homer = NaturalPerson->new(
      firstName => 'Homer', name => 'Simpson' );
   $storage->insert( $homer );

   my $marge = NaturalPerson->new(
      firstName => 'Marge', name => 'Simpson',
      age => 34 );
   $storage->insert( $marge );

   $marge->{age} = 35;

   $homer->{partner} = $marge;

   $homer->{children} = Set::Object->new(
      NaturalPerson->new(
         firstName => 'Bart', name => 'Simpson' ),
      NaturalPerson->new(
         firstName => 'Lisa', name => 'Simpson' ),
      NaturalPerson->new(
         firstName => 'Maggie', name => 'Simpson' ) );

   $storage->update( $homer );

...Tangram automatically inserts the kids when their father is
updated. OTOH, $marge will not be automatically inserted nor updated;
her age will remain '34' in persistent storage.

=head2 id

   $id = $storage->id( $obj );
   @id = $storage->id( @obj );

Returns the IDs of the given objects. If an object is not persistent
in storage yet, its corresponding ID is undef().

This method is valid in both L<scalar and list contexts>.

=head2 oid_isa

   if ($storage->oid_isa($id, "ClassName")) {
      ...
   }

Checks that the passed Object ID, C<$id>, is a "ClassName" according
to the schema.  This check relies solely on the information in the
schema, not Perl's idea of C<-E<gt>isa> relationships.

=head2 load

   $obj = $storage->load( $id );
   @obj = $storage->load( @id );

Returns a list of objects given their IDs.
Dies if any ID has no corresponding persistent object in storage.

This method is valid in both L<scalar and list contexts>.

=head2 remote

   @remote = $storage->remote( @classes );

Returns a list of L<Tangram::Remote> objects of given classes.
This method is valid in both L<scalar and list contexts>.

=head2 select

   @objs = select( $remote );

   @objs = select( $remote, $filter );

   @objs = select( $remote,
      opt1 => val1, opt2 => val2, ...);

Valid only in list context. Returns a list containing all the objects
that satisfy $filter.

$remote can be either a Remote object of an array of Remote
objects. If it is a single Remote, a list of objects is returned. If
it is an array, a list of array of objects is returned.

If one argument is passed, return all the objects of the given type.

If two arguments are passed, the second argument must be a
Filter. select() returns the objects that satisfy $filter and are
type-compatible with the corresponding Remote.

If more than two arguments are passed, the arguments after $remote
 are treated as key/value pairs. Currently Tangram recognizes the following
directives:

=over 4

=item * filter

=item * distinct

=item * order

=item * desc

=item * distinct

=item * limit

=back

C<filter> specifies a Filter that can be used to restrict the result
set.

C<distinct> specifies that each object in the result set must be
unique (Tangram generates a SELECT DISTINCT).

C<order> specifies attributes in terms of one or more of the remote
objects - any that are being selected, or any that appear in the
filter.

C<desc> specifies that the order should be descending.  Order of which
of the columns in the C<order> category, you might ask?  The last one
for now :-}.  This syntax is therefore deprecated, to be replaced with
a unary C<-> operator to order columns in some future Tangram release.

C<distinct> is a boolean; a true value specifies that the same object
should ocur only once in the result set.  In general, this is a good
idea; 

C<limit> is a maximum number of rows to retrieve; in fact, with some
databases you can give two numbers to this to get the rows between N
and M of a select.  See your RDBMS manual for more.  If you want to
specify more than one number, you may use the following syntax:

   $storage->select( $object, filter => (...),
                     limit => [ 5, 10 ] );

The above example would return rows 6 through 15 on a MySQL database.

The select method is valid only in list context.

=head2 cursor

   $cursor = $storage->cursor( $remote );
   $cursor = $storage->cursor( $remote, $filter );
   $cursor = cursor( $remote,
      opt1 => val1, op2 => val2, ...);

Valid only in scalar context.

Returns a Cursor on the objects that are type-compatible with $remote.

If one argument is passed, the cursor returns all the objects of the given type.

If two arguments are passed, the second argument must be a
Filter. The cursor returns the objects that satisfy $filter and are
type-compatible with the corresponding Remote.

If more than two arguments are passed, the arguments after $remote
are treated as key/value pairs. Currently Tangram recognizes the following
directives:

=over 4

=item * filter

=item * order

=item * desc

=item * distinct

=item * retrieve

=back

For options C<filter>, C<order>, C<desc> and C<distinct>, see C<select>.

Option C<retrieve> is an array of Expr, to be retrieved in addition to
the object itself.

=head2 erase

   $storage->erase( @obj );

Removes objects from persistent storage. The objects remain present in transient storage.

=head2 tx_start

   $storage->tx_start();

Starts a new Tangram transaction.

Tangram transactions can be nested.

Tangram maintains a transaction nesting count for each storage and commits the operations only
when that count reaches zero. This scheme makes it easy for a function to collaborate with its caller
in the management of the L<internal connection>.

Example:

   sub f
   {
      $storage->tx_start();
      $storage->update( $homer );
      $storage->tx_commit(); # or perhaps rollback()
   }

   sub g
   {
      $storage->tx_start();
      f();
      $storage->update( $marge );
      $storage->tx_commit(); # or perhaps rollback()
   }

   f(); # 1
   g(); # 2


In (1), f() commits the changes to $homer directly to the database.

In (2), f() transparently reuses the transaction opened by g().\
Changes to both $homer and $marge are commited to the database when g() calls tx_commit().

=head2 tx_commit

   $storage->tx_commit();

Commits the current Tangram transaction for this storage.
If the transaction being commited is the outermost transaction for this storage, the DBI
transaction is also commited.

=head2 tx_rollback

   $storage->tx_rollback();

Rolls back the current Tangram transaction for this storage.
If the transaction being rolled back is the outermost transaction for this storage, the DBI
transaction is also rolled back.

=head2 tx_do

   $storage->tx_do( sub { ... } );

Executes CODEREF under the protection of a Tangram transaction and
pass it @args in the argument list.

Rolls back the transaction if CODEREF dies; in which case the
exception is re-thrown.

Returns the results of CODEREF, either as a scalar or as a list
depending on the context in which tx_do was called.

Example:

   $storage->tx_do(
      sub
      {
         $storage->update( $homer );
         # do things, die perhaps
         $storage->update( $marge );
      } );

Both $homer and $marge will be updated, or none will, depending on
whether the anonymous subroutine passed to tx_do() dies.

=head2 unload

   $storage->unload( @obj );

Drops references to persistent objects present in memory. @objs may
contain both objects and object ids. If @objs is empty, unloads all
the objects loaded by this storage.

Storage keeps track of all the persistent objects that are present in
memory, in order to make sure that loading the same object twice
results in a single copy of the object.

As a consequence, these objects will not be reclaimed by Perl's
automatic memory management mechanism until either disconnect() or
unload() is called.

unload() should be called only when no other references exist to
persistent objects, otherwise the same object (in the database) may
end up having two copies in transient storage.

=head2 disconnect

   $storage->disconnect();

Disconnects from the database. Drops references to persistent
objects present in memory (see C<unload>).
